Add date limits to JSON schema and document opener parameters API (#336)
dcs4cop/xcube: docs/source/opener_parameters_api.md

   [xcube-cds](https://github.com/dcs4cop/xcube-cds)
 - The
   [`xcube.util.jsonschema`](https://github.com/dcs4cop/xcube/blob/master/xcube/util/jsonschema.py) source code

## Opener parameters

Every implementation of an xcube `DataOpener` or `DataStore` MUST implement
the `get_open_data_params_schema` method in order to provide a description of
the allowed arguments to `open_data` for each dataset supported by the
`DataOpener` or `DataStore`. The description is provided as a
`JsonObjectSchema` object corresponding to a [JSON
Schema](https://json-schema.org/). The intention is that this description be
full and detailed enough to allow the automatic construction of a user
interface for access to the available datasets. Note that, under this system:

  1. Every dataset which an opener provides can support a different set of
     opener parameters.

  2. The schema does not allow the representation of interdependencies
     between values of opener parameters within a dataset. For
     instance, the following cannot be represented in an open
     parameters schema:
     
     *sensor_type*: A or B  
     *variables*: [temperature, humidity] for sensor type A;

>                   [temperature, pressure] for sensor type B

Author: Yes. I have now updated the document to clarify this.

To work around some of the restrictions of point (2) above, a dataset MAY be
presented by the opener as multiple "virtual" datasets with difference
parameter schemas. For instance, the hypothetical dataset described above
could be offered not as a single dataset `envdata` but as two datasets

> `envdata:sensor-a` and `envdata:sensor-b`, with different sets of permitted

Author: Done.

     allowed parameter combinations.

  2. The additional restrictions on parameter combinations MUST be clearly
     documented.

  3. If illegal parameter combinations are supplied, the opener MUST raise an
     exception with an informative error message, and the user interface
     should present this message clearly to the user.

## Common parameters

While an opener is free to define any opener parameters for any of its
datasets, there are some common parameters which are likely to be used by the
majority of datasets. Any dataset requiring the specification of these
parameters MUST use the standard parameter names, syntax, and semantics
defined below, in order to keep the interface consistent. For instance, if a
dataset allows a time aggregation period to be specified, it MUST use the
`time_period` parameter with the format described below rather than some other
alternative name and/or format. The parameters are described below with their
Python type annotations.

 - `variable_names: List[str]`  
   A list of the identifiers of the requested variables.
 - `bbox: Union[str,Tuple[float, float, float, float]]`

>    The bounding box for the requested data, in the order x0, y0, x1, y1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The bounding box for the requested data, in the order xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax. 
   Must be given in the units of the specified spatial coordinate reference system `crs`. 
```

 - `crs: str`  

>    The identifier for the co-ordinate reference system of geographic data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The identifier for the spatial coordinate reference system of geographic data.
```

 - `spatial_res: float`  

>    The requested spatial resolution (x and y) of the returned data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The requested spatial resolution (x and y) of the returned data.
   Must be given in the units of the specified spatial coordinate reference system `crs`. 
```

 - `time_range: Tuple[Optional[str], Optional[str]]`  
   The requested time range for the data to be returned. See section
   ‘Date, time, and duration specifications’ below.
 - `time_period: str`  
   The requested temporal aggregation period for the data. See section

>    ‘Date, time, and duration specifications’ below.

Reviewer: Is it possible to add in-page ref for _‘Date, time, and duration specifications’_?

Author: Done.

## Semantics of list-valued parameters

The `variables` parameter takes as its value a list, with no members repeated
and the values of its members drawn from a predefined set. The values of this
parameter, and other parameters whose values also follow such a format, are
interpreted by xcube as a *restriction*, much like a bounding box or time
range. That is:

 - By default (if the parameter is omitted or if a `None` value is supplied
   for it), *all* the possible member values MUST be included in the list. In
   the case of `variables`, this will result in a dataset containing all the
   available variables.
 - If a list containing *some* of the possible members is given, a dataset
   corresponding to those members only MUST be returned. In the case of
   `variables`, this will result in a dataset containing only the requested
   variables.
 - As a special case of the above, if an empty list is supplied, a dataset
   containing *no data* MUST be returned -- but with the requested spatial and
   temporal dimensions.

> ## Date, time, and duration specifications

Reviewer 2: If I understand correctly time periods are specified only by a duration character e.g. M or Y. However, they are in the same chapter of the date/time RFC you quoted.

Reviewer: Right!

Author: I deliberately left this vague, and should have marked it explicitly as a TODO. We should discuss exactly what we want to support as a period specification -- I couldn't find it detailed anywhere in the xcube docs.

Author: As to the idea that month units are forbidden for time periods in pandas or xarray, I can't find any evidence of this. For instance, [here's](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/examples/weather-data.html?highlight=month#Monthly-averaging) an example of monthly averaging with xarray and [here's](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/timeseries.html#timeseries-offset-aliases) the extensive list of pandas time series frequency specifiers (which includes monthly). I'm not sure whether we'd want to explicitly support the powerful and complex pandas schema; perhaps a small subset would be safer.

Author: I suggest that, for now, we define the time period format as [integer][unit], where [unit] is one of HDWMY (hour, day, week, month, year), and [integer] may be omitted to indicate 1. This could even be validated by a simple JSON Schema format regex.

Author: Suggestion in previous comment now implemented.

month – day), for example `1995-08-20`. The `date-time` format consists of a
date (in the `date` format), a time (in `HH:MM:SS` format), and timezone (`Z`
for UTC, or `+HH:MM` or `-HH:MM` format).  The date and time are separated by
the letter `T`. Examples of `date-time` format include `1961-03-23T12:22:45Z`
and `2018-04-01T21:12:00+08:00`. (Fractions of a second MAY also be included,
but are unlikely to be relevant for xcube openers.)

## Time limits: an extension to the JSON Schema

JSON Schema itself does not offer a way to impose time limits on a string
schema with the `date` or `date-time` format. This is a problem for xcube
generator UI creation, since it might be reasonably expected that a UI will
show and enforce such limits. The xcube opener API therefore defines an
unofficial extension to the JSON string schema: a `JsonStringSchema` object
(as returned as part of a `JsonSchema` by a call to
`get_open_data_params_schema`) MAY, if it has a `format` property with a value
of `date` or `date-time`, also have one or both of the properties
`min_datetime` and `max_datetime`. These properties must also conform to the

> `date` or `date-time` format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`date` or `date-time` format.
xcube provides a dedicated `JsonDatetimeSchema` for this purpose. Internally, it extends
the `JsonStringSchema` by adding the required properties to the JSON string schema.
```

@pont-us Please add new class `JsonDatetimeSchema` and test. This will make code more readable!

these to supplement or modify its standard presentation of the common
parameters.

### Schema annotations (title, description, examples, and default)

For JSON Schemas describing parameters other than the common parameters, an
opener SHOULD provide the `title` and `description` annotations. A UI
generator SHOULD make use of these annotations, for example by taking the
label for a UI control from `title` and the tooltip from `description`. The
opener and UI generator MAY additionally make use of the `examples` annotation
to record and display example values for a parameter. If a sensible default
value can be envisaged, the opener SHOULD record this default as the value of
the `default` annotation and the UI generator SHOULD set the default value in
the UI accordingly. If the `title` annotation is absent, the UI generator
SHOULD use the key corresponding to the parameter's schema in the parent
schema as a fallback.

### Generalized conversion of parameter schemas

For parameters other than the common parameters, the UI can be generated
automatically from the schema structure. In the case of a GUI, a one-to-one

> conversion of instances of `JsonSchema` subclasses into GUI elements will

Reviewer: I'd prefer a translation of _JSON schema_ to GUI elements here, rather than a translation of `JsonSchema` subclasses to GUI elements. In the GUI, we will receive plain JSON and we should make no assumption of how this JSON was generated.

Author: Agreed, and updated accordingly.
